GWEN IFILL: Good
evening. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: Welcome back.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's
great to be back.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: an historic visit. Pope
Francis arrives in the
U.S. to a presidential welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also
ahead this Tuesday:
MICHAEL HORN, CEO, Volkswagen
America: And in my German words,
we have totally screwed
up.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Volkswagen admits
it rigged at least 11 million
cars to pass emission
tests.
GWEN IFILL: And women in combat
-- ahead of a major decision by
the military, the Navy
secretary on why he disagrees
with some Marines about opening
up the ranks.
RAY MABUS, U.S. Secretary of the
Navy: Set high standards. Make
sure those standards
have something to do with the
job. And then whoever meets
those standards, gender is not
-- is not crucial.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pope Francis is
now in Washington, after
arriving today to pomp, ceremony
and
cheering, chanting crowds. The
start of his six-day stay
followed four days in Cuba.
William Brangham reports
on the day's events.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The pope began
his first-ever visit to the
United States late this
afternoon,
flying into a military facility
just outside Washington.
President Obama, Vice President
Biden and their families greeted
Pope Francis on the
tarmac while hundreds
more awaited.
Presidential adviser
Valerie Jarrett:
VALERIE JARRETT, Senior
Presidential Adviser: Everyone
who is coming is excited about
the
opportunity to be in his
presence. And so I think that
this visit means a great deal
to America.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Security was
tight across the nation's
capital, with barriers erected
at the White House for the
pontiff's official welcome and
meeting with the president
tomorrow.
Workers at the National Shrine
of the Immaculate Conception
also made final preparations.
The
pope celebrates mass there
tomorrow afternoon.
JACQUELYN HAYES, National Shrine
of the Immaculate Conception:
Everybody is just collectively
feeling the excitement of having
the pope here. And all the many
long days and long
hours of work are really coming
together to bring just a
wonderful event to fruition.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Francis will
address Congress on Thursday,
before going on to New York and
then Philadelphia. The U.S. leg
of his tour began after he
wrapped up a four-day visit
to Cuba.
LANIA LINARE, (through
translator): We're very proud
that he chose our province to
come
bless us, to give us all
his joy here in Santiago.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The pope used
his final mass on this communist
island to urge Cubans
to rediscover their
Catholic heritage.
POPE FRANCIS, Leader of Catholic
Church (through translator): Our
revolution comes about through
tenderness, through the joy
which always becomes closeness
and compassion, which is not
pity.
It is to suffer in order to be
free. And it leads us to get
involved, to serve others.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And he met
with families at the Cathedral
of Santiago and offered a
goodbye from its balcony to the
crowds massed outside. The pope
avoided directly addressing
political issues in Cuba. But in
the U.S., many anticipate he
will address immigration
reform, climate change
and other issues.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham in Washington,
D.C.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the flight
from Cuba to Washington, the
pontiff dismissed claims that
he is a political liberal. He
told reporters -- quote -- "That
would be a mistake of
interpretation."
And he added that he follows the
social doctrine of the church.
GWEN IFILL: Chinese President Xi
Jinping has also arrived in the
U.S., ahead of his meetings
with President Obama this week.
Xi's Air China plane touched
down in Seattle this morning,
and he was greeted by state and
local officials. He will attend
a forum with tech leaders
tomorrow.
Before his arrival, Xi told The
Wall Street Journal that China
will go ahead with economic
reforms, despite
sluggish growth.
There's no break yet in the
abortion fight that's tied up
the U.S. Congress and could
force a government shutdown.
Senate Democrats blocked a bill
today to ban late-term
abortions.
Now Republicans say they will
seek to fund the government into
December, but strip money
from Planned Parenthood.
Democrats say they will block
that too.
JUDY WOODRUFF: European interior
ministers pushed through a
crisis plan today to relocate
120,000 migrants and refugees.
As they did, throngs of people
continued pouring across
Croatia, Hungary and Austria
by rail, road and on foot.
Jonathan Miller of Independent
Television News followed their
journey today.
JONATHAN MILLER: We drove from
Croatia into Hungary by remote
border crossing early this
morning, and you would have
thought they were preparing for
war.
Overnight, Hungary's Parliament
had passed a law deploying
troops to handle what its
prime minister has cast as a
Muslim invasion. The Humvees
arrived, the border now
bristling
with military hardware and
soldiers. This country's
population rights-wing leader,
Viktor
Orban, had pledged a crackdown
to end the influx and to defend
what he called Christian
culture.
But he's being forced by
Croatia, which in less than a
week has dumped 30,000 asylum
seekers on his doorstep, to
facilitate their transit to the
richer E.U. member states
further
north.
At a Hungarian station called
Hedashalom (ph) this afternoon,
way up in the northwestern
Austrian border, 1,300 people
disgorged from a train that had
come from the Croatian frontier.
From the station, they're
shepherded toward Austria.
As rather friendlier Austrian
soldiers received the new
arrival, reports from Brussels
that
the bickering between E.U.
member states on where to put
people who have arrived in
recent
weeks had reached a fever pitch.
For all the exasperation in
Brussels, for all the political
feuding, the barbed comments
and the bad blood, even if they
do decide on how and where to
resettle 120,000 people,
it won't make the blindest bit
of difference on not only the
exodus from the Middle East,
but on where these people end
up. They're pouring into Europe
at such a rate that, in
20 days' time, there will
be another 120,000 people.
An Austrian soldier, a
second-generation immigrant
himself, offered reassurance and
instructions
in Arabic. As they stood
waiting, European interior
ministers finally voted for
their
plan for mandatory quotas to
farm out the 120,000 refugees.
Four former Soviet bloc
E.U. member states dissented,
but were overruled.
The U.N. Refugee Agency has
already branded the plan
irrelevant to the worst
humanitarian
crisis in decades. The aim was
to allow E.U. leaders to present
a united front at their
emergency summit tomorrow.
Instead, deep rifts have been
exposed, as the human surge
continues
to build.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The four nations
opposing the resettlement plan
are the Czech Republic,
Hungary, Romania and Slovakia.
GWEN IFILL: The exiled president
of Yemen has returned to his
country for the first
time since Shiite rebels forced
him to flee. President Abd-Rabbu
Mansour Hadi spent the
last six months in Saudi Arabia.
He arrived back in the port city
of Aden today, after
his forces recaptured
it with Saudi support.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Separate attacks
in Afghanistan left 15
government troops dead today. In
one,
an Afghan soldier let militants
into a checkpoint to shoot his
fellow soldiers.
Meanwhile, the U.S. commander in
Afghanistan, General John
Campbell, said the sexual abuse
of young boys by Afghan forces
will not be ignored. He denied
that U.S. troops have been
told to look the other way.
GWEN IFILL: The former U.S.
commander in Iraq and
Afghanistan apologized to
Congress today.
Retired Army General David
Petraeus is serving two years
probation for giving classified
information to his former
biographer and mistress. His
testimony at a Senate hearing
was his
first since he resigned
as CIA director in 2012.
DAVID PETRAEUS, Former CIA
Director: I made a serious
mistake, one that brought
discredit
on me and pain closest -- to
those closest to me. It was a
violation of the trust placed
in me and a breach of the values
to which I have been committed
throughout my life.
There's nothing I can
do to undo what I did.
GWEN IFILL: The focus of the
hearing was U.S. strategy
against Islamic State forces.
Petraeus
called for beefing up
efforts in Iraq and Syria.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile,
there's word the Obama
administration is shifting more
attention
to Syria, and may arm a wider
array of rebels. A Washington
Post report says the change is
a recognition that efforts in
Iraq have stalled, whereas
Kurdish forces are gaining
ground
against ISIS in Syria.
GWEN IFILL: In Saudi Arabia,
more than two million Muslims
observed the opening rites
today in the annual hajj
pilgrimage to Mecca. Vast crowds
of worshipers circled the Kaaba,
a cube-shaped structure in the
city's Grand Mosque. The main
ceremonies come tomorrow
in a valley outside Mecca.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, Democratic presidential
candidate Hillary Clinton said
she will oppose building the
Keystone pipeline across the
nation's midsection. She'd
previously
declined to state a
position publicly.
Appearing in Des Moines, Iowa,
Clinton also called for capping
prescription drug costs
and cutting tax breaks
for drug advertising.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: Too
often, so-called new drugs are
really
old drugs that have just been
tweaked a little bit. But then
they're marketed as breakthrough
drugs, and they're sold for high
prices. Drug companies should
have to explain why their
new drugs are different and
better than treatments on the
market.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile,
Republican presidential
candidate Jeb Bush was also in
Iowa. He promised
he will place a freeze on new
federal government regulations
if he's elected.
GWEN IFILL: If you are like most
Americans, you are going to have
at least one mistaken,
or delayed, medical diagnosis
some time during your life. The
prestigious Institute of
Medicine
reported that finding today. It
said the causes range from poor
communication to misread lab
tests. And it called for urgent
changes to address the problem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wall Street had a
down day, driven by falling oil
and copper prices. The
Dow Jones industrial average
lost nearly 180 points to close
at 16330. The Nasdaq fell
more than 70 points. And
the S&P 500 slipped 24.
GWEN IFILL: And the Interior
Department announced it will not
list the greater sage grouse as
an endangered species. Instead,
it wants to conserve 67 million
acres of habitat. The
unusual bird, usually found in
the West, has seen its numbers
dwindle from millions to
just a few hundred thousand. Its
fate has been a longstanding
issue across 11 states.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Volkswagen admits to rigging 11
million cars; the painful
legacy of sexual abuse in the
Catholic Church; the Navy
secretary on women in combat;
and
why girls struggle to get
an education in India.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The scandal, and
the fallout, over Volkswagen's
cheating of emissions standards
grew today. Just last week, the
EPA alleged there was deceitful
software in half-a-million
cars. Today, Volkswagen raised
that number significantly and
tried to restore customer
trust.
Volkswagen revealed that as many
as 11 million diesel-powered
cars worldwide could be affected
by software that was designed to
cheat on emissions tests. Most
of those cars are thought
to be in Europe, the automaker's
primary market. The revelation
caused Volkswagen stock to
plummet for a second day. The
company lost almost 19 percent
of its stock value, or $17
billion, Monday. The price
plunged another 20 percent
during trading in Frankfurt
today.
The CEO of Volkswagen America,
Michael Horn, gave a frank
apology last night at an event
in Brooklyn.
MICHAEL HORN, CEO, Volkswagen
America: So, let's be clear
about this. Our company was
dishonest. We have
totally screwed up.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A year-long
investigation by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency
uncovered
the software. It switches on a
car's emissions controls when a
smog test is taking place.
But the controls turn off again
when the test is over, leaving
cars emitting up to 40 times
the legal pollution limits.
The software is installed in
Volkswagen Jettas, Beetles,
Golfs and Passats and Audi A3s
sold
in the U.S. since 2008. The
Justice Department has
reportedly opened a criminal
investigation
of the automaker. Investigations
are also being launched in
France, Germany and South
Korea.
For more, we turn to John Stoll.
He is Detroit bureau and global
automotive editor for The
Wall Street Journal. He has been
following developments in this
story closely.
John Stoll, welcome.
You have been covering this
story closely. And you have
covered other auto industry
problems.
Where does this one rank?
JOHN STOLL, Global Auto Editor,
The Wall Street Journal: It's up
there.
I mean, this is one, because of
the volume of vehicles we're
talking about and the sort
of transatlantic implications --
11 million is not a small number
when you talk about
the U.S. car park. About 85
million vehicles are sold a
year. So, yes, that's spread
over
several years of production, but
that's a large sum of cars. And
Volkswagen right now
is the biggest automaker in the
world, as of the first half of
2015, huge aspiration,
and obviously, in Germany,
they're a big employer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Explain exactly
what Volkswagen did to these
cars to make them game this
emissions
test.
JOHN STOLL: Right.
From what we understand -- and a
lot of this was explained in the
story that you had -- is
the software is known as sort of
a masking device. It works when
the compliance testing
is undergone, when that's
ongoing. The emissions
information says what the test
need it to
say, so that it passes
regulatory tests.
And then in real-world
condition, it emits far more of
the harmful emissions such as
NOx into the air than is legally
allowed. And so it's pretty
sophisticated software
that can detect when it's being
tested. And, you know, I'm sure
there's going to be forensics
of who exactly designed the
software and authorized it and
whether or not this is more
widespread.
But, at the moment, the EPA has
been pretty explicit on how this
thing works.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you raise
the question. This was something
that was deliberately done
by someone. I mean, who had to
know? How high up the company is
it thought that this went?
JOHN STOLL: You know, I have
talked to a lot of people about
that. It's hard to believe
that -- well, I would say that
in order to pull this off, the
circle could be relatively
tight.
You know, the pressure is high
when it comes to meeting
engineering standards. Diesel is
a very important part of
Volkswagen's play, not only in
Europe, but in the United
States.
And they needed to get these
cars back on the market about
six or seven years ago in
order to keep its
momentum going.
In order to meet that objective,
one could imagine that the
circle would remain pretty
tight and need-to-know basis. I
have talked with executives who
were at the company at
the time who have since left,
said they knew nothing about
this and would imagine that
this originated in Germany, but
that's speculation at this
point.
The interesting thing -- and
this is probably the silver
lining and the bright light at
the end of the tunnel -- is
Volkswagen is committing to full
transparency. And we learned
last year in the GM ignition
crisis what that really could
mean, is a full, hundreds and
hundreds pages of
self-revelation, usually done by
an outside law firm or
investigator,
that will probably be answer
more of these questions, who
knew what when, who authorized
it and why. But that could be
several weeks, if not months in
coming.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we're
talking about potentially
significant amount of damage to
the environment.
We said, what, 40 times the
pollution level is what these
cars were emitting.
JOHN STOLL: As much as
that. That's right.
And this is a very harmful
substance. And these are very
harmful emissions. There's
no doubt. And I think
particularly the people who buy
Volkswagen diesels -- and this
is
generalizations -- but they are
not only looking for a fuel
economy bump, they're not only
looking for a way to save fuel
consumption and money. They are
buying into the promise
that they are reducing
emissions, that these are safer
for the environment, that the
promise
of -- quote, unquote -- "clean
diesel emissions" is actually
what they advertise it to be.
And that's what makes this so
egregious, at least on the
surface. A lot of people are
saying, hey, this ranks up there
with some of the most egregious
corporate scandals in
recent history because of the
length of time that the
deception went on. And they went
up very far in terms of
regulators of saying they didn't
know it was going on. They
didn't
know why there was a disparity
between real-world emissions and
testing.
And then only about a month ago,
within the last month, they have
come clean on this issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Stoll, any
evidence? What are people saying
about whether this could
have extended to other
diesel manufacturers?
JOHN STOLL: Thus far, we haven't
heard from everyone in the
diesel market. But thus far,
a lot of automakers have come
out and said they have done
their forensics. They have
asked the questions of the
people internally, the engineers
that they need to, and they're
pretty confident that they are
not employing the same software.
I will give you a quick for
instance. I called General
Motors today. They have a lot of
diesels
on the market in Europe. And
they wanted to popularize a
smaller car diesel in the United
States. They say they have
already looked into this and
they are 100 percent confident
that what they have displayed to
regulators is the truth is
actually the truth.
So, I think we will see more of
this roll on, but you better
believe that there's a
lot of automakers, regulators
and outside researchers looking
into that exact question.
And I think this isn't the last
of that story that we have
heard, but maybe the worst case
of it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it sounds
like there's certainly more to
be reported on here.
John Stoll with The Wall
Street Journal, thank you.
GWEN IFILL: It's not yet clear
what issues Pope Francis will
directly address during
his visit here, but one problem
casts a long shadow for the
church: sexual abuse scandals.
This pope has pressured top
church officials to end abuse
involving priests. Just this
year, the bishops of Saint
Paul-Minneapolis and Kansas city
have resigned in the wake
of new revelations.
As part of our special coverage
of the pope's visit this week,
special correspondent Chris
Bury reports on how sex abuse by
clergy still haunts American
Catholics.
CHRIS BURY: For the Archdiocese
of Saint Paul and Minneapolis,
with more than 800,000
Catholics,
the sex abuse scandal still
resonates in a raw and immediate
way.
JENNIFER HASELBERGER, Former
Church Attorney: I think, by
anyone's definition of a crisis,
we're in it. And there doesn't
seem to be any way out.
CHRIS BURY: For nearly five
years, Jennifer Haselberger
served as the cannon lawyer, an
expert in church law, for the
archdiocese, but, in 2013, she
resigned in protest after,
she says, top church officials
ignored her cautions about a
priest's behavior.
Haselberger then tipped off
authorities and reporters to a
sex abuse scandal.
JENNIFER HASELBERGER: I was
personally devastated when I
learned of the abuse that had
taken
place on my watch. And if I had
been able to do anything about
that, then I would have
done everything I could, but
there's so much opposition to
doing anything that would keep
people safe, that I couldn't
be part of it any longer.
CHRIS BURY: In June, her former
boss, Archbishop John Nienstedt,
and another bishop abruptly
resigned, less than two weeks
after the Ramsey County
prosecutor dropped this
bombshell.
JOHN CHOI, Ramsey County
Prosecutor: And what justice
requires is that we file
criminal
charges against the Archdiocese
of Saint Paul and Minneapolis
for its role in failing to
protect children.
CHRIS BURY: What startled many
Catholics here is that the abuse
took place not decades ago,
but within the last five years.
Former Priest Curtis Wehmeyer
plead guilty to molesting three
boys between 2010 and 2012,
two of them in this camping
trailer in the parking lot of
his church. He's now serving
a five-year sentence in this
Minnesota prison and faces more
prison time in Wisconsin for
abuses there. Wehmeyer had been
promoted to pastor of Blessed
Sacrament Church in Saint
Paul, despite warnings
about him at the time.
JENNIFER HASELBERGER: He had
been caught cruising in places
where people go for anonymous
sex.
He had propositioned some very
young men. And all of this was
clearly documented.
CHRIS BURY: Did this archdiocese
willfully ignore signs of a
pedophile priest?
BISHOP ANDREW COZZENS,
Archdiocese of Saint Paul and
Minneapolis: I don't think that
any
person willfully ignored --
willfully ignored signs of a
pedophile priest, even if we can
say that perhaps
mistakes were made.
CHRIS BURY: Bishop Andrew
Cozzens is among the officials
newly appointed to cope with
the crisis and carry out
reforms. A former top state law
enforcement official, Tim
O'Malley,
was hired to oversee compliance.
TIM O'MALLEY, Archdiocese of
Saint Paul and Minneapolis: It's
not enough to do what's
right. You have got to follow
through on that. That didn't
happen as well as it should
have.
CHRIS BURY: But now they say a
review board of 10 laypeople and
two priests will evaluate
every allegation of improper
behavior and hand any cases
involving children to law
enforcement.
So you turned this over
to police right away?
TIM O'MALLEY: Absolutely, yes, I
mean -- and I mean, right away,
that day.
CHRIS BURY: That didn't happen
in the case of Jim Keenan. He
filed a lawsuit against
a former Minnesota priest who
admitted abusing him when he was
13.
JIM KEENAN, Victim of Priest
Abuse: Had the truth church
followed the societal rules of
turning criminals over to the
police, I would have never met
him, nor would most of his
victims.
CHRIS BURY: Keenan was an altar
boy when parish Priest Thomas
Adamson, a good friend of his
family's, molested him
over a year's time.
JIM KEENAN: He was a
professional pedophile. He knew
how to groom the young people
that
he wanted to molest,
and he was good at it.
MAN: And did you
abuse those kids?
THOMAS ADAMSON, Former
Catholic Priest: Yes.
CHRIS BURY: Adamson was removed
from the priesthood and this
church, but wasn't punished for
what
he did to Jim Keenan.
JIM KEENAN: We went all the way
to the Minnesota Supreme Court,
and we lost on a technicality
of statute of limitations.
CHRIS BURY: In a videotaped
deposition for other civil case,
Adamson admitted sexual
acts with at least 10 boys.
MAN: Mr. Adamson, have you
ever spent a day in jail?
THOMAS ADAMSON: No.
MAN: Don't you think
you should have?
THOMAS ADAMSON: No.
CHRIS BURY: What
was your reaction?
JIM KEENAN: I almost threw my
one-liter bottle of soda through
the TV set. To hear and look
at his face, and there was a
smugness to it: No, I shouldn't
have gone to prison. It's
not criminal. It's a sin.
CHRIS BURY: The first alarm
bells for American church
officials sounded 30 years ago
just
80 miles from the Twin Cities at
Saint John's Abbey, one of the
country's oldest Catholic
institutions.
In June 1985, bishops from all
over the country gathered here
at Saint John's Abbey. They
were given a 92-page report
warning of trouble ahead. It
cautioned that sexual
molestation
of children by priests and
clerics could -- quote -- "pose
extremely serious financial
consequences
and significant injury
to the church."
That report turned out to be
uncannily prophetic. Seventeen
years later, the scandal
exploded
after The Boston Globe exposed
the cover-up of sexual abuse by
parish priests.
ACTOR: When you have poor kids
from a poor family and when a
priest pays attention to
you, it's a big deal. How
do you say no to God?
CHRIS BURY: The story is
depicted in the new movie
"Spotlight" starring Michael
Keaton.
ACTOR: This is not just Boston.
This is the whole country. It's
the whole world.
CHRIS BURY: As similar cases
erupted across the country, the
consequences have been enormous,
just as the bishops were warned.
The Saint Paul and Minneapolis
Archdiocese, facing more than
400 claims alleging sexual
abuse of minors and adults, is
now selling off millions of
dollars worth of property
after filing for bankruptcy
earlier this year. In all, 12
American dioceses and two
religious
orders have sought bankruptcy
protection since the scandal
first broke in 2002.
For Pope Francis, the lingering
impact of those cases and others
worldwide has led him
to establish a new tribunal for
any bishop accused of failing to
protect children.
POPE FRANCIS, Leader of Catholic
Church (through translator):
This is my anguish and pain,
the fact that some priests and
bishops violated the innocence
of minors.
MAN: Almighty God, have mercy on
us. Forgive us all of our sins
and bring us to life
everlasting.
CHRIS BURY: And in the pope's
first major American
appointment, he chose Bishop
Blase
Cupich to head the huge Chicago
Archdiocese. Cupich is an
outspoken critic of church
leaders,
who he says have failed
to put children first.
In Chicago, Cupich says, the
archdiocese has set the gold
standard for preventing sex
abuse
after enduring painful scandals
of its own. Now safeguards
include background checks and
fingerprinting for all employees
and sex abuse training for
priests, clerics, volunteers,
teachers, students,
and children.
ARCHBISHOP BLASE CUPICH,
Archdiocese of Chicago: We make
sure that people who work for us
who
are working with children are
never with a child alone, that
they always have more than
one adult, that there are
certain good touches and bad
touches that are taught, so that
they
recognize how a child might feel
uncomfortable, that they also
are alerted to any improper
activity that would be
immediately reported.
CHRIS BURY: In downtown Chicago,
the diocese has built a public
garden in the name of healing
for victims of sex abuse by
clergy. At the entrance, a
profound apology is inscribed
on this plaque.
Now even a survivor of childhood
sex abuse tells us he's
comfortable putting his children
in Catholic schools here. As a
teenager, Michael Hoffman was
molested by his parish priest,
who was eventually
sent to prison.
MICHAEL HOFFMAN, Victim of
Priest Abuse: I know the safe
environment initiatives that
my kids had to go through, and I
know that each and every
volunteer, myself included,
we had to go through the
Protecting God's Children class.
I am sure of the protection
of my children and all of
the children in our parish.
CHRIS BURY: But in the Twin
Cities, where the scars are so
fresh, the canon lawyer who
blew the whistle notes that the
archdiocese is contesting the
criminal case against it.
JENNIFER HASELBERGER: If that
case goes the trial, it's going
to be incredibly ugly. The
Catholics and the non-Catholics
of this archdiocese are going to
have to hear things about their
church that I don't know they're
prepared to hear. And there
aren't a lot of people
that are going to come out of it
with their reputations intact.
Other critics contend that even
with new reforms, the Vatican
has yet to punish a single
bishop
for enabling the abuse of
children. So 40 years after
American bishops were first
warned
here in Minnesota of an
impending scandal, Catholics are
still coping with the bitter
consequences. I'm Chris bury for
"PBS NewsHour" in Saint Paul,
Minnesota.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Follow all our
coverage of the pope's visit.
Plus, our guest columnists'
reflections on faith
at PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
checking in on the global
challenge to educate all
children.
But, first, the battle brewing
at the Pentagon over the future
of women in America's armed
forces.
Early next year, Defense
Secretary Ashton Carter is
expected to announce whether
previously
closed positions to women in the
military will open. The Army,
Air Force and Navy are
expected to allow women to
serve in all combat roles.
But Marine Corps Commandant
General Joseph Dunford, soon to
be chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, has asked that
the Marines be excluded from the
new rule.
Joining me now to explain why he
disagrees with that assessment
is Navy Secretary Ray
Mabus, who is also the civilian
head of the Marine Corps.
Welcome. And thank you for
joining us, Secretary Mabus.
RAY MABUS, U.S. Secretary of
the Navy: Gwen, thank you.
GWEN IFILL: There is a report
that has come out that shows
that women in integrated combat
units were slower, there were
more injuries, they were less
accurate at firing weapons.
What is your take
on that report?
RAY MABUS: Well, first, the
commandant and I share the
overall goal of making sure we
maximize the combat
effectiveness of the United
States Marines. That's the first
principle.
Second, this study, that Marine
study, and had Marines doing
very valuable work, and
it came out with some great
findings, the main one of which
was that, before then, there
had been no standards set
for being in the infantry.
So, this study set those high
standards. Before then, it was
assumed that if men went through
boot camp, they could become
Marine infantry. Turned out that
the specific jobs in the
infantry,
which the study went through,
deconstructed all the jobs,
here's what you need to do to
be a success in this,
to do the job.
But then the Marines took
averages from the study. It
wasn't the individuals. They set
the high standards. But then
they looked across averages. And
the Marines have never been
about average. The Marines
are about exceptionalism.
And what my view is, set high
standards. Make sure those
standards have something to do
with the job. And then whoever
meets those standards, gender is
not crucial. If you can
meet the standards, you
should be able to serve.
GWEN IFILL: Should those
standards include other ways in
which these studies show that
women excel, for instance, lower
incidence of mental health
problems?
RAY MABUS: Well, I think that
the standards themselves, in
terms of what you have to do,
because if you're a Marine in
combat, in infantry combat, you
want to know that the Marine on
either side of you has met
the same high standards.
And that's what this study has
brought forth, that here are now
the standards to be a Marine
in Marine infantry. But once you
do that, the notion of somehow
saying, even if you
meet the standards, you can't
serve because of your gender,
that doesn't follow to me.
GWEN IFILL: General Dunford
aside, you know there has been
some pretty vigorous pushback
from Marines about whether
this is a good idea or not.
Do you -- is this a legitimate
concern on the parts of these
Marines, or is this a -- speak
to the culture of the
Marine Corps itself?
RAY MABUS: Well, I think the
Marines -- and I have talked to
thousands of Marines out
around the world in my now more
than six years in this job.
The Marines that I have talked
to, the one concern they have is
that standards not be
lowered, is that they know, if
they go into combat, that people
have met these high standards.
Now, before this, there were
surprising number of men who
couldn't do the infantry job
just
because they had come
through boot camp.
And so now those Marines are
going to have the certainty that
the Marines on either side
of them have met those
standards. And that shouldn't
depend on gender.
GWEN IFILL: But what do you say
to those in the Corps who say
this will prove to be a
challenge to the alchemy, the
chemistry of the Corps, also
unit cohesion?
RAY MABUS: Well, number one,
that's not one of the arguments
that the Marines have made
in terms of whether an
exemption should be given.
But, number two, I have seen the
Marines enough. Once they're
given a task, they move out.
They execute. They do it better
than anybody. And there were
similar concerns, Gwen, at
the repeal of don't ask, don't
tell. There was all sorts of
concerns out, as people talked
about it, that if you allowed
gay service members in, that it
would harm the unit cohesion.
And there were similar concerns,
you know, in the late '40s, when
the Marines integrated.
And each time, the Marines have
shown that, once a decision was
made, once the decision
was made to make sure that,
whether it was
African-Americans, whether it
was gay service
members or now women, whatever
decision Secretary Carter
finally makes, integrated into
their
force, that they're really
good at making it right.
GWEN IFILL: One more concern
that has been expressed, which
is that this is an example
of politically correct
social engineering.
RAY MABUS: Well, the thing that
I want to point out is, these
are Marine standards.
These are standards that
the Marines set up.
And if somebody can meet Marine
standards, they should be able
to be a Marine.
GWEN IFILL: No
matter the gender.
RAY MABUS: No matter the gender.
And I think that's almost the
opposite of political
correctness. That's setting a
very
high standard, but saying,
we have set the standard.
GWEN IFILL: How unusual is it
for this kind of disagreement to
be aired so publicly?
RAY MABUS: Well, the one thing I
want to make certain that is
understood, General Dunford
and I have a tremendous respect
for each other. We have a
tremendous working relationship.
I admire and respect him just
without -- without cease.
And he's going to be a great
chairman. And the president and
the secretary of defense
are very fortunate that they
will have him to give them
advice. We give each other our
very candid opinions.
And, sometimes -- sometimes,
they diverge, but the underlying
notion that we want to
maintain and maximize the
effectiveness and the combat
effective of the United States
Marine Corps, we're
absolutely together on.
GWEN IFILL: And, as you
mentioned, the final decision
rests with the defense
secretary,
Ashton Carter, between now and
January 1. Is that correct?
RAY MABUS: That's correct.
The services put their
recommendations in by October 1.
And, you know, the Navy, I will
point out that the SEALS are not
asking for an exception here.
GWEN IFILL: So, if there can be
women Navy SEALs, there can be
women Marines, you're
saying, in combat roles.
RAY MABUS: Again, set the
standards. Do not deviate. And
then whoever meets those
standards,
they ought to get
to perform the job.
GWEN IFILL: Secretary of the
Navy Ray Mabus, thank you.
RAY MABUS: Appreciate it, Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fifteen years
ago, the United Nations set a
goal: By this year, every child
in every nation should be able
to obtain free basic education.
While the number of children out
of school has been cut almost in
half, there are still
57 million worldwide who have
never set foot in a classroom.
Hundreds of millions more
have dropped out.
PBS has been reporting on the
global education crisis by
following six children from
different
countries over 12 years, part of
WNET's documentary series "Time
for School."
Tonight, we travel to India,
where nearly 100 percent of
children start primary school.
But especially for girls in
rural areas, staying in school
remains a challenge, and
literacy
rates have not improved.
NARRATOR: Neeraj Gujar is 9
years old and lives with her
tightly knit family of herders
in a small village in Rajasthan,
a desert region in the northwest
of India. It's a deeply
traditional community, where
women rarely have the chance to
go to school.
NEERAJ GUJAR, India (through
translator): My name is Neeraj.
I'm about 9 or 10, and
I have been studying for the
past year, math, multiplication,
addition. So I'm learning.
QUESTION (through translator):
Did you ever go to school?
WOMAN (through translator): What
would I go to school for? What's
so great about being
educated? Even if you study,
these educated people have
nothing to do. Anyway, the
everyday
chores will take over.
NEERAJ GUJAR (through
translator): I work during the
day. I do so much. I have to
sweep.
I have to bring water. I have to
make dung cakes. I have to graze
the cows.
NARRATOR: Like many girls here,
Neeraj can only go to school if
she does so at night.
In Rajasthan, 56 percent of the
female population is illiterate.
Schools like hers started in
India to educate the country's
legions of girls, who must work
all day.
The goal was that students would
eventually transfer into
mainstream day schools.
SHYOJI RAM, Teacher (through
translator): This is our Earth.
It's round. This map is
flat, but, otherwise, our Earth
is round. If I keep four this
side and four this side,
it will equal eight.
This education's going to help
them. An illiterate person
doesn't know these things. These
girls
are more confident about
expressing themselves. And
they're beginning to express
themselves.
NEERAJ GUJAR (through
translator): By the time I come
back, everyone's asleep. When
I grow up, I want to go to a big
school to study. By then, I will
know more. And then
maybe I can become a teacher.
Four plus four,
eight. Six plus six.
(through translator): It's been
a long time since I last
studied.
NARRATOR: Over the years,
droughts have forced Neeraj to
leave school for months at a
time
to graze the cattle far from
home. Meanwhile, many of her
friends had advanced to the day
school, and, without enough
students, the night school
closed.
NEERAJ GUJAR (through
translator): I liked everything
about night school. Everyone
would
study and talk. All the friends
would sit together. I really
miss that a lot.
NARRATOR: After Neeraj's school
was closed, her teacher tried to
help her transition into
the government-run day school.
But for all her effort, Neeraj
had only qualified for
second grade, so she was placed
in a class with much younger
children.
NEERAJ GUJAR (through
translator): When I was made to
sit with the younger children
they'd tease me, saying,
"Oh, she's so big."
Sitting with the little ones, I
felt embarrassed. That's why I
dropped out.
WOMAN (through translator): See?
We let her study until first and
second grade. She has
to learn how to cook now. What I
want is that she makes a good
match and really enjoys life.
What else? That's
what parents want.
KANARAM GUJAR, Father of Neeraj
(through translator): We will
look for an educated boy. Happy,
she
will be.
NEERAJ GUJAR (through
translator): I met him on our
wedding day. Honestly, I'm
telling
you the truth.
MAN (through translator): I
first saw her by the well in
Tilonia.
A boy marries whom his parents
want him to. He has no choice in
the matter. They will
make sure that she's beautiful
and knows how to do all the
housework. I'm a farmer, so
an uneducated wife is a
suitable match for me.
NARRATOR: Neeraj is now 21 years
old, and has been married for a
year. Her husband,
Jagdish (ph), supports them
delivering milk with his new
truck. As is traditional, Neeraj
lives with her in-laws, but,
today, she is traveling home to
give birth to her first
child.
NEERAJ GUJAR (through
translator): My hearts gets
happier as I get closer to my
village.
My daughter's name is Anita
(ph). She will grow up to be a
smart woman. I would like
her to be a doctor in a big
hospital. But who knows what
will happen? I'm a mother now.
No more playing around for me.
We must focus on the girl's
education.
MAN (through translator): My
wife and I talk when we have
time. We have to work and we
have to educate our daughter.
We didn't have education.
NARRATOR: In India today,
enrollment in primary schools is
nearly universal compared to 84
percent 15 years ago. But school
quality, absenteeism, and
dropout rates still remain
a problem in rural areas.
Nonetheless, the chances for
Neeraj's daughter, Anita, are
much better than they were for
her mother.
NEERAJ GUJAR (through
translator): Now I'm filled with
regret. I wish I had continued
my studies. I could've held my
own with educated folks. Now I
can only do the farming and the
housework.
Education not only helps the
individual, but the entire
family as well.
Gershwin
GWEN IFILL: Finally tonight, on
this the last day of summer, we
put away our white shoes,
straw bags and sunglasses
to say goodbye.
Jeffrey Brown caught up with
composer and musician Rob
Kapilow recently at the
Signature
Theatre in Arlington, Virginia,
to deconstruct the iconic
Gershwin song "Summertime."
JEFFREY BROWN: Summertime, and
the living is easy, except we
know it isn't somehow,
right?
ROB KAPILOW, Composer: One of
the things that's great is Aaron
Copland, when he talked about
Martha Graham, who did the
choreography for "Appalachian
Spring," he said about her that
she is seemingly, but
only seemingly, simple.
And the same thing's true with
Gershwin. It is seemingly, but
only seemingly, simple.
This is supposed to be just a
simple lullaby, but, in fact,
there's craft everywhere. Take
even the beginning
of this piece.
I mean, everybody knows this
piece as just starting with just
one bar of introduction,
because normally we just sing it
as a song. And the voice already
comes in, and you barely
even notice that there
was an introduction.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
ROB KAPILOW: But, in the opera,
there's eight fantastic measures
before this that transition
us into the world of Catfish Row
in a fantastic way, and one note
makes all the difference.
JEFFREY BROWN: Musically,
but one note is the key?
ROB KAPILOW: One
note is the key.
I mean, you hear this little
figure that starts and ends on
the same note. You hear it one
more time down low. Everyone
expects this. He changes only
the last note. That one note
brings us into the world of
Catfish Row. It's amazing, the
power of a single note.
JEFFREY BROWN: The music
changes, the landscape changes,
and the mood changes.
ROB KAPILOW: One of the central
requirements for any great
Broadway composer is the ability
to create atmosphere
in an instant.
(MUSIC)
ROB KAPILOW: Becomes...
ROB KAPILOW: We're
in Catfish Row.
JEFFREY BROWN: And then the song
begins and becomes a lullaby,
yes.
ROB KAPILOW: It's just a
lullaby. But it is a lullaby in
a place.
And the way he establishes that
place is so beautiful and
economical. We have got Catfish
Row. Then she's supposed to be
rocking her baby back and forth.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
ROB KAPILOW: So he does it with
two notes, rock left, rock
right, and add bells in the
middle, left, right, right. Now
we put chords around it. Those
two notes become part of
rocking chords.
JEFFREY BROWN: Of course, this
is the -- this is what the song
is about too, right? Summertime,
the living is easy. But we're
watching people for whom it's
not easy.
ROB KAPILOW: The living
is anything but easy.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
ROB KAPILOW: But in Gershwin's
imagination, somehow, it wasn't
easy, but it was filled
with all the things that
make community great.
Now, he could easily have
written a short note on time,
and there would have been no
summertime. It could
have sounded like this.
(singing): Summertime,
and the living is easy.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
ROB KAPILOW: But watch that one
long note on time totally takes
you into the world of
it, summertime. That
one long note...
JEFFREY BROWN: Slows
everything down.
ROB KAPILOW: Slows everything
down. And then here.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: That's the
languor you were talking about.
ROB KAPILOW: That's the
languor in one note.
Then he could have done:
(singing): And the
living is easy.
But it's:
(singing): Easy.
The lengthening of those few
notes totally makes Catfish Row
come alive for us.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's the trick of
the composer, right? I mean, not
trick in a pejorative sense,
but...
ROB KAPILOW: It's artless art.
It's art that hides it's art. It
just sounds like a simple
lullaby, but there's
so much art going on.
In fact, everywhere you look,
take what comes next. Then he
has fish are jumping. Well,
how do you make fish jump? That
one little short note, and the
fish are jumping right
in front of your eyes. And then
even the accompaniment, he could
have just written this. But
listen
to these wonderful slithery
chords in between. Only Gershwin
would have done that.
It's also amazing how much he
took from those black spirituals
he heard down in South Carolina.
JEFFREY BROWN: In fact, this is
a Northerner, it's a Jewish
composer looking at the South,
at a black community
in South Carolina.
ROB KAPILOW: Yes. It's, in fact,
two white guys speaking for the
black community.
And, in fact, there was an
enormous amount of controversy
when this piece came out about
it. In fact, Virgil Thompson,
the music critic of The Times,
said in a very provocative way,
who is George Gershwin to be
speaking for this community that
could speak for themselves?
And I think there's certainly a
valid point there. But I think
what's wonderful about
it is, he sort of took the world
that he went and saw there and
translated it to the best
of his abilities into
his own language.
JEFFREY BROWN: He
used some of the
music from there...
(CROSSTALK)
ROB KAPILOW: Well, actually, he
was very specific about saying
he didn't want the use anyone
else's spirituals. He
wanted to invent his own.
Even the street vendor cries
that he used, he wanted to write
his own. So, he was very
particular saying that even
though he was influenced by it,
he wanted nothing in there
to actually be a quotation. So,
even when he uses blues notes
like:
(MUSIC)
ROB KAPILOW: Believe me, that
chord is not a chord that you
ever heard in the blues down
there.
JEFFREY BROWN: That's his
version of the blues, yes.
ROB KAPILOW: That's his version.
And I think that's what a great
artist does. He takes what's out
there in front of him,
but he translates it ultimately
into his own language. And
that's the difference between
influence and imitation.
I think of Gershwin, there was
this belief that he could create
an imaginary world that
would be authentic to his
imagination, if not to the
reality of Charleston, South
Carolina.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
"Summertime," a great song to
get us through the winter,
right?
ROB KAPILOW: Absolutely.
JEFFREY BROWN: Rob Kapilow.
ROB KAPILOW: Thanks so
much for having me.
JEFFREY BROWN: Thanks so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Another way
to think about "Summertime."
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: Viola Davis made a historic
win at the Emmy Awards,
when she became the first
African-American woman to win
best actress in a drama. But
data suggests that Hollywood
could do far more to improve
diversity on the screen. You
can learn about the
findings on the Rundown.
Plus, regular "NewsHour"
columnist Wendy Thomas Russell
offers a cheat sheet to Yom
Kippur,
the Jewish day of atonement. All
that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour
GWEN IFILL: Tune in tonight on
"Charlie Rose." Ian Bremmer of
Eurasia Group talks to Charlie
about America's changing
relationships with China, Russia
and the Vatican.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow evening. For all
of us at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.